Good morning.
I'm Wiley Hodges.
I'm the Senior Product Line Manager for
Developer Products at Apple.
And one of the many things that I'm
responsible for at Apple is product
marketing for Java on Mac OS X.
You know, we're really excited about what
we've been doing with Java,
but I'm also extremely excited
about what many of our partners
have been doing with Java.
And in particular,
a very important Java partner is Sun.
And I'm very pleased that
this morning I can introduce
Bob Brewin and Carl Quinn,
who will be talking about
Java Studio Creator on Mac OS X,
which we're extremely pleased
to see coming to our platform.
So, with no further ado.
Thanks, Wiley.
Thank you very much.
So we're going to be talking
about iChat on the PDP-4.
Oh, sorry.
So I'm Robert Brewin.
I'm a distinguished engineer at Sun,
chief architect for Project Rave,
which is now called
Sun Java Studio Creator.
Carl Quinn is one of our senior
engineers responsible for some of
the core technology inside of it.
So he's going to be giving a
little demo a little later.
And so what we're going to talk about is,
so why did we do Creator?
What things were we
interested in targeting?
What kind of customers
were we looking at?
What kind of developers?
We'll talk about the
project creator itself,
give us an idea of what kind of
quality measures we had for it,
what kind of features we wanted,
what kind of capabilities we
thought we could offer developers.
We'll talk about
Java development on Mac OS X.
By the way, if I say Mac OS X,
just throw something at me.
Preferably a G4 PowerBook because
I need a new one.
Thank you.
Then we'll do a product demo and
we'll let Carl fly with that.
Then I'll talk a little
bit about the roadmap,
where we're going,
the kinds of things we're trying to do
in the Sun Java Studio Creator product.
So let's take a look
at market segmentation.
One of the things that we wanted
to do was try to understand what
sort of developers are out there,
what kind of applications
are they trying to create.
And so one can create any kind of
arbitrary diagram or spreadsheet
or something to try to capture it.
And what we did is we
came up with a quadrant.
And the quadrant is
pretty self-explanatory.
If we take a look along the bottom,
the bottom axis talks about
application complexity.
How complex is that application?
Going up in the vertical axis,
we talk about code,
how much coding is actually required.
And we divided this into four quadrants.
And for this diverse group, we looked at,
for instance, the technologist base.
So these are people that do a lot
of coding and they love to code,
but the applications they create
are not necessarily that complex.
Technologists love the latest thing.
They love to go to java.sun.com,
play with the latest APIs.
They love open source.
They like free stuff.
These are the kinds of people that
create a lot of the innovative
technologies and products that we see
coming out on java.com and other places,
including some of the java.net sources.
Enterprise architects, on the other hand.
I have a lot of code
in their applications.
They're very knowledgeable,
but the applications
are incredibly complex.
For those kinds of applications,
we're looking at industrial strength.
These are the kinds of
applications that run Wall Street.
These are the kind of applications
that run the telephone services,
the things that make
your mobile phones work.
They need architectural tools.
They need UML modeling.
They need things to go ahead and
allow them to performance tune
and scale the applications for the
enterprise and so that the dial
tone never stops on your phone.
The integrators are people who take
potentially very complex applications
and assemble them together.
So these are people that take existing
applications and they're doing the,
there's a lot of technology that
is just emerging in terms of
business process modeling and so on,
where people are taking
pre-built components,
some of them very large scale,
putting them together to
create end user solutions.
Corporate developer space
is all about productivity.
These are the people who are
doing maybe not so much code.
They're reusing existing
infrastructure and artifacts.
And the application complexity is
not necessarily that high either.
Again, these are people who are primarily
building applications that a lot of
you see within your IT infrastructure.
So people that are
doing travel accounting,
people that are doing payroll management,
things like that.
For them,
a lot of times complete solutions
are extremely important.
They may not be experts in the
sense of programming experts,
they may not have PhDs
in computer science,
what they would like to do is
they would like to be at one CD,
install it and have everything they need,
all the tools, all the run times,
everything they need to actually get
productive and develop applications.
Simplified development.
We talk about the
corporate developer space.
One of the things are that they're not
necessarily your typical developers.
They could be domain experts.
If we take a look at the spectrum,
and we'll take a look
at that quadrant again,
if we take a look at the spectrum
of what corporate developers do,
they may range from people that
are doing spreadsheet macros,
all the way up to people
who are using 4G languages,
Delphi,
Visual Basic and other code languages.
So they could be domain experts.
They may be people that understand,
for instance, the mortgage business.
They may be people that understand HR.
They may be people that
understand the financial system.
understand finance,
but they may not be typical developers.
The applications they create typically
are not producers of business logic.
They are in fact consumers of them.
So they consume a lot of data.
They consume business services.
They consume a lot of the application
artifacts that the enterprise developers
create or the technologists create.
Typically,
you'll take a look at a corporate
developer and if we contrast that to
the way an enterprise developer works,
an enterprise developer works
typically from the back to the front.
So I've done enterprise development.
So I've sat down with UML modeling
tools and I've devised this really
large and complex architecture,
inspected all out and then built
this huge thing and then started
grafting UIs on top of it.
Corporate developers
typically work in the reverse.
They have an idea in their
mind about how this application
is going to look and behave,
they design the user interface and then
they wire all the pieces in beneath it.
And usually what they're trying
to get is a rich UI because again,
they're visualizing this thing as this
is what I want my end users to see
and that end user may be only them,
could be a department,
could be a work group,
but generally it's a
smaller group of people.
The problem when we take a look
at the application space today
is that the bar to enter to
Java with most IDEs is too high.
So if I take a look at a technologist or
I take a look at an enterprise architect,
the value they get is
richness and flexibility.
While for the corporate developer,
it's simplicity and understandability.
One of the examples that I like
to use is the difference between
a Cessna plane and a 747.
Both of them will get me
from point A to point B.
Both of them have a small subset
of controls that's the same.
But the amount of experience,
the amount of understanding of
all the way that these systems
work together has to be a lot
higher to get a 747 to fly from,
let's say, LA to New York.
But a Cessna will work just the same way.
Again, you know,
the idea here is to provide a simple
interface and a set of abstractions
that the corporate developer can work
with to develop their applications.
And again, like I said,
they need a complete solution.
So one of the things we're
looking for is a one-stop shop.
So like we're talking about with a plane,
if we're going to develop an
application or a tool in a runtime
infrastructure that is simple,
all that power still
needs to be available.
One of the things that we've run into
is it's not just corporate developers
that are using tools like this.
Enterprise developers and
technologists are using them as well.
Why?
Well, if I'm tasked with creating
a large J2E infrastructure,
you know, I'm spending 40% of my time
developing JSP front ends.
Well, I'm wasting my time.
I should be spending all my
brain power working on the hard
problems and solving those.
So the richness of the
platform needs to be available.
I need to be able to get underneath
the covers if I know what I'm doing.
And if I'm going to take that
application and move it from a corporate
developer space into somebody who
really understands what they're doing,
I need to be able to get to the code and
I'm able to dive down and then tweak it.
But the use of the complex
APIs should not be required.
I shouldn't have to
be able to understand,
for instance,
what a Java server face's lifecycle is in
order to actually develop an application.
I shouldn't have to know it.
all the platform APIs are either.
The resulting code should be obvious.
I should be able to look at the
code and understand intuitively
what it's supposed to be doing.
If I'm setting a property or
if I'm responding to an event,
I should be able to have
a basic understanding of
how that's going to work.
For people that are
transitioning from languages like
Visual Basic or coming from Delphi,
they should be able to look at
the code that we generate and have
that same understanding of what
that thing is supposed to be doing.
Understanding higher-order
concept is not required.
I shouldn't have to know what a visitor
pattern is in order to be productive.
Again,
when I talked about upfront design,
it's important to understand that I'm
going to design the interfaces and
then I'm going to configure properties
and set the attributes as I'm moving
forward and then plug in the logic.
So simplified coding
doesn't mean no code.
One of the things that we're really
looking at is when we generate code,
that code is exactly
what you expected to do.
We're not going to be hidden anything
or there's no proprietary XML layer
which is driving this entire system.
One of the things that we did when
we first started this project is we
took a look at the entire spectrum
of all developer products out there,
specifically ones which were targeting
the corporate developer space.
When we did that,
we saw a lot of companies which
were of the ilk where you would
design some interface or specify
some attributes for a system,
and it would generate this
huge meta model in XML that
you could never move forward.
You could never update.
You could never manage.
What the developers were
telling us were also that,
well, they want the code.
So I may be able to quickly
prototype an application,
but I want to be able
to get to the Java code.
I want to be able to get to the
XML descriptors if I know what I'm
doing and if I need to migrate this
and scale it to the enterprise.
So one of the things and the general
tenets that we have for Creator is
we just generate pure Java code.
If we need XML descriptors,
they're there.
We might hide them behind
really pretty veneers,
which are our visual tools,
but they're all there so I can take
that application and then I can move it,
scale it to somewhere else.
So let's talk about Creator.
Excuse me.
So Sun Java Studio Creator,
which used to be called Project Raive,
is designed for corporate developers.
It's designed for people who want
to be immediately productive,
people who are going to be
developing applications or
people who are experiencing going
to be prototyping applications,
but they don't necessarily
want to learn the plumbing.
They don't necessarily have to learn and
read the multi-hundred page JSF spec,
JSP, JSTL, servlets,
J2EE and Java to understand
what they're doing.
It's the first IDE that's completely
built from bottom to top on Java,
100%. It's designed to be
around the idea of what you see,
what you get, highly productive,
drag and drop.
Everything when you see what you
see on the screen is what you'll
see in the end application.
The other thing is that we,
as I described,
people design applications
in terms of the front,
the user interface,
and they wire it in behind.
So one of the things that we had to do
was make sure that you can get to data,
you can get to services and easily
drag them and drop them and put them
and wire them into your application.
The other thing is that unless
you're building just a single page,
you need to understand how that page is
going to interact with some other page.
How am I going to get
from point A to point B?
And so, again, we could just throw the
XML descriptors at them,
but we thought the visual page navigation
would be a much better way to go.
Again, the idea being is that this
whole environment is visual.
So Java standards,
one of the things that Sun of
course is really key on is
everything should be standard.
I should be able to
take this application.
I should be able to run it on any server
that you have that's J2EE compliant.
And that's something that we've done.
So you can take a
Java Studio Creator application.
Not only can I take that code
and move it into any development
environment that supports Java,
I can take the resulting application
and deploy it to any J2EE compliant
server and have it run.
So for that we use Java Server Faces.
If you're also going to
the Java 1 conference,
you'll see there's a lot of hype and a
lot of conference material about JSF.
JSF provides a simplified component
model and runtime that allows people
to create web applications easier.
We use JDBC ROSATS.
JDBC ROSATS is a new
JSR that just went final,
which holds the promise of a simplified
JDBC access through a ROSAT model that
allows things like the supports web
applications to support data caching.
So when we talked about our quadrant,
obviously Sun Java Studio Creator targets
the lower left,
corporate developers.
And again, it's a range,
so it doesn't necessarily mean these
are all going to be people who are
doing scripting and spreadsheets,
but it does include people
that are doing enterprise work.
It does include people
doing technology work.
But the idea is to make them as
productive as possible and to make
people develop applications in Java.
So Sun Java Studio Creator is what
we're going to go ahead and demo today.
And what it has is it's
based on NetBeans 3.6.
One of the advantages of NetBeans
is it provides us a mature product.
A lot of the people that are using
our product are people who are
in fact experienced developers.
Once they develop that application,
they're going to want to have the
same sort of capabilities they can
get with any standard Java IDE.
By building on NetBeans,
we get a mature product
that performs as our base.
Again, what I talked about before,
it's just Java.
So take the application,
deploy it to any J2E app server.
It's open in any
Java development environment.
So I can open this thing in JBuilder,
I can open it in Xcode,
I can open it in WebSphere Developer,
any of those products.
And if you have any kind
of Java programming skill,
it works everywhere.
And the other thing, of course,
is it's perfect for the Apple developer.
So an interesting characteristic of
our team is we started out a priori
thinking of the Mac platforms.
So a third of our developers are
all building and developing and
testing this application on the Mac.
So rather than building it on, well,
I don't know, Solaris,
and then porting it to
all the various platforms,
we are in fact building it every day and
testing it every day on Mac OS X as well
as Windows as well as Solaris and Linux.
The other thing is that we've
leveraged the latest platforms that
the Apple engineers have put together.
In fact, you're going to watch Carl crash
and burn here in a few minutes
because being an engineer,
he decided to download what?
DP3 DP3 last night for the demo.
So we'll see how that works.
So he is the last surviving
member of the Flying Wallenda,
if you remember them.
So one of the other things we
talked about is complete solutions.
You've got to be able to develop,
you have to be able to
deploy right out of the box.
You can't expect people to go
hunting around and determining what
the right platform is to run on,
the right tool, the right JDK.
So in the box,
when you get Studio Creator,
you get Sun Java Studio Creator,
you get the
Java Application Server Platform Edition
8,
which is the latest version
of the J2E1.4 runtime.
You get a lightweight test DBMS which
allows you to go ahead and very
quickly prototype and develop
applications against the database.
However,
we include a number of data direct
drivers in the box for you for Oracle,
Sybase which I know run
on the Mac platform,
DB2 and SQL Server if you're daring.
Full developer productivity.
One of the things you get when
you buy Creator and you join the
Software Developer Network program
is you get a website,
you get tutorials, you get forums,
code samples, support,
and that support will
be growing over time.
Excuse me.
So it's a complete package.
Now a number of you are going
here to the Apple conference,
but one of the things you can
do is next door at Java 1,
we're offering a deal.
And kind of fortunate for you is you
don't need a badge to get the deal,
because if you walk
into the south entrance,
you can get "SunJava
Studio Creator Field Guide," which is the
first book to come out for Creator in it,
you get the full package
of Creator based on the
Software Developer Network subscription
program,
which includes everything you see there.
Now normally, the subscription program
for Creator will be $99.
Today, if you buy this book,
which is about $40,
you get that $99 subscription
as well as the book for $49.95.
So if you have a chance during lunch,
run over there and pick up the book.
Now we'll talk about the
release plans for the Mac,
but the interesting thing about the
way we've done this is that any license
key you get with this product when
the Mac version is available in terms
of an FCS product for final release,
that same license key you get with
this will work with that product.
So again, you save yourself a few bucks
here if you go out and get this.
And not only that,
you get a pretty good book to
describe what the system's about.
So let's talk about
Java development on Mac OS X.
So Java is a core component of
the Mac OS X platform environment,
obviously.
I mean, you've been hearing about
a lot of the conference.
I was at the keynote yesterday.
So it's a full version of Java 2.
He's building it on DP3,
as you heard a little earlier.
It's optimized for the platform.
And Java applications
are first-class citizen.
And we've actually taken that
and proven that by building
Creator on the Mac OS X platform.
Obviously, we have a bunch of Unix
hacks in our group,
and so they really enjoy the fact
that Mac OS X is built on Unix.
So all of those tools and the
capabilities you get and the
portability and scalability you get
with Unix is all available to them,
as well as the full
complement of the J2E stuff.
And what can you say
about ease of development?
I think you guys have it.
Something that we've tried to aspire to.
So this particular development
environment provides a rich set
of development tools Obviously,
if you shop around,
you'll find out you get Apple X code.
There's Java Studio Creator.
Sun has a number of products.
NetBeans and IBM and others have
products for the Mac platform.
And as I described earlier,
any application you create with Creator,
if you wanted to,
you could develop it in those codes.
And we've done that.
We've actually moved our code,
and we have some people that have
done development on the Mac and
taken Creator code in there.
So what I'm going to do is I'm
going to turn it over to Carl,
and we're going to watch him fly.
And he's going to go ahead and show
you a little bit about Creator.
He's going to talk you a
little through the system,
talk about the environment,
talk about the
applications we can create,
and give you sort of a general
run-through of what we can expect.
Okay.
Hi.
I'm going to first start out by
showing a partial application
that we've built with Creator,
and I'll just kind of walk you
through the functionality and the
look and feel of this application.
So this is kind of a media zone.
The resolution looks
pretty good up there.
It's sort of a website where you can
go and log in and purchase things,
sort of an iTunes for poor man's iTunes,
I guess.
So we start out with a page with some
sort of featured media on the front page.
And on the right,
there is a tree control that lets you
browse different categories of content,
artwork, images.
Service a little slow right now.
There we go.
So we can browse through photographs.
Preview some of the content.
If anybody was at last year's Java one,
they can't forget Taurus Victory,
saving the demo.
So at this point we can't purchase
any content we haven't logged in,
it doesn't know who we are.
So up on the top there's a little
panel where we can log in and
use the ubiquitous FUBAR login.
We can see that the panel
is actually now switched.
It's switched from the login
panel to the panel that shows
that we're already logged in.
It's given us a little message at
the bottom that shows hello FUBAR,
shows who we are, our user identity,
our person ID.
And now I'm able to
check off and purchase,
potentially purchase
some of this content.
So one thing is this particular
application is not yet finished.
There's pages that aren't there,
some things that are missing.
So why don't we go ahead and take a look
at how the application is assembled.
So I'll pull up Java Studio Creator and
then we'll try to fill in some
of the missing functionality.
So actually what I'm going to do
is create a brand new project based
on the template that I saved which
contained the media application.
So we had opened that original
incomplete application and saved it as
a template so that we can then reuse
it and add on to it so we can kind of,
in a workflow environment,
we can just keep building on the project
that we had sort of set up as a skeleton.
So at this point it's actually copying
lots of media files and parsing all
of the Java code and the JSP code.
So again,
we're building an application that's
based on Java Server Faces and
David P.
No, this is just lots of media files.
There's a lot of files in here.
This is actually a rather complex
demo that one of our engineers
who joined our architect,
Craig McClanahan,
which is created for Java 1,
so it really is loading a
tremendous amount of files.
One of the things, of course,
it's doing is it is in fact
loading every single file,
parsing them all,
generating a bunch of information
that we'll need to go ahead
and do the actual demo.
Either that or DP3 was a mistake.
David P.
Yeah, that could be.
We also tried to make it even more
complicated by booting my system.
We're running this on the G5 here.
That's booted off the
target mode PowerBook.
So we're going over the
FireWire cable and...
So we thought it would be a
little bit too easy to just
put it on the machine itself.
Okay.
There we go.
So, what we have here,
the first page is the welcome page
that we saw in the application.
It's really just kind of a highlight
showing some of the various,
you know, selected content for the day.
Let me refresh a little bit,
get that guy to paint.
You can see the various
components that we have here.
So this is the visual designer.
So it's a WYSIWYG editor.
It lets you lay out the
Java Server Faces components,
drag and drop onto the screen,
position them.
Using CSS2 style sheets,
you can actually set up
backgrounds and styles,
configure the positions and look and
feel of all of the components using that.
So let's go walk through
some of the components here.
So for instance we have on the left
there is an application outline which
shows you sort of the breakdown detailed
view of the components on your page.
Then we see the various,
we have some image components here,
some of them just for look.
Some of them are actually
bound to information that's
coming from the program.
So this particular cover image here is
going to be filled in at runtime with
data from the database that will actually
contain pointer to the cover art itself.
Now if I can interject,
one thing that the design
preset behind what we've done
is that again truth and code,
everything here is real Java,
real XML and it's all
there or JSP in this case.
But what we're doing is essentially
we're prying a model view to a tool.
So what you're looking here is just
one view of what is in fact a JSP.
On the bottom of the page,
on any number of pages,
you'll see that we have
design and source views.
If you're more comfortable
writing in raw JSP,
have at it.
One of the other things that
maybe Carl will get into it,
later on is that everything
we do is kept in sync.
So if I make changes either in the visual
representation of any view you see,
or the raw JSP,
or if we're looking at a Java code file,
we make a change there.
Or if we take a look at the navigation
view and change the navigation
configuration in an XML file.
Those changes get reflected
throughout your entire application,
which Carl knows well about
because that's his baby.
So I'll let you go on.
Okay.
So we're going to show a few more
things on this first welcome page.
We actually have a couple
of reusable components here.
We've created some fragments.
So at the top of every
page in our application,
we're going to want to have this
little login bar that shows the
user whether they're logged in
or that they need to log in.
So we've actually put
this in a separate page,
so it's actually a page
fragment using JSP fragments.
And on this page,
we've laid out this sort of multiple
card layout combination of components,
which I'll come back and
show you a little bit later.
But you can see that it's just
dropped directly into the JSP.
And so that's the first
component that we've created.
And then we've also created a little
bit of a new component that's just
dropped directly into the welcome
page and placed as if it were sort
of a composite component on its own.
And so then that can be
reused on every page.
And so that's the first component.
So let me see.
And also over here we have the same
kind of thing we did with the little
menu control that we saw on the right.
I hit the right part of it.
It's actually inside of a div over here.
Now, this particular component is a
custom component that Craig actually
wrote for this application.
And he didn't implement any
design time visualization.
So what we're seeing here,
this component at design
time is just a white box.
It's not very interesting.
But all of the components that
are added in to create are just
Java server-facing standard components.
And they can be dropped in,
just imported in, dropped in.
And as the market matures
for the JSF components,
the vendors are going to know that they
want to supply design time visualization.
So fake data maybe just to
show what the components,
the example of what the component
will look like when it's displayed.
Okay, yeah.
This particular page that comes up at the
beginning is populated from information
that's just written in Java code.
So I'm going to switch over.
So for every page that you see,
there's the JSP source that
we saw a little while ago.
There's also a backing bean.
So there's a Java bean behind
it that controls all the logic
and the flow of the page.
Now in here, there's a bunch of code
that Creator generates
and manages for the user.
And you can go in and
look at it if you want,
but what we've done is we
use code folding to fold up a
lot of these blocks of code.
Just by default so that
it doesn't clutter up.
So when the user drops back in here to
add in their event handlers and things,
they just see a couple methods,
just the things they need to look at.
So in this case,
you can see the components on the
page have been dropped in here,
and they're built as Java beans.
So they become properties of the page,
and so there's a getter
and a setter for each one.
There's also potential initialization
code in the constructor.
hit that guy in this case there aren't
any java site beans that need to be
initialized and actually when craig
set up this part of the application
he went ahead and added his own code
folding so that he can wrap up all of the
configuration methods into a big block
that he can turn on and off and take a
look at now one of the interesting things
to note here is is that if you take
a look at other tools which are providing
a sort of a multi-way capability in
a tool or code generation facilities one
of the things you'll see frequently is
guarded blocks don't touch this you touch
this you die third rail of a product
application in this case there are no
such entities in creator of generated
code you can check and change anything
and the system will track it modify
those changes and if something gets
reflected elsewhere for instance one
of the things you'll note is there's
this this is binary relationship between
those elements on a page those things in
code and one of those is the ability to
easily visualize and for instance modify
a property in code or handle an event
it's pretty easy for instance if i have
a button i want to do something with the
button it's much easier for you actually
to write a small little one-line piece
of code in the java bean that's backing
the page rather than hunt through the
markup and try to find out where i can
send an attribute and so one of the the
key points of that of course is that once
you start doing that you're talking about
making changes in multiple places and
so when we when one of the things we did
when we implemented the technology behind
creators to make sure that you can do
that safely and without the requirement
for having guarded blocks that if you
took into some other tool for instance
would blow away either deliberately
or accidentally and so your application
will continue to run as expected okay
I was going to show in this one.
So in this particular,
this is the main page that comes up in
the application and what Craig chose
to do was just write some straight old
Java code to set up the various little
thumbnails on that starting page.
So he pulls out some of these.
The list of the thumbnails from the
application being itself and then
just starts populating by setting
properties on these components.
So it's just very straightforward kind
of boilerplate Java code that he wrote at
this point to configure the first page.
The first page is a little bit more
complicated than the first one.
So it's a little bit more
But you can see here he's actually
accessing an application being
so get application being so in
a normal create a project which we
give the user an application being
which lives in application scope.
So that same being is shared by
all the users of the application.
So all the user sessions
will have access to it.
And this is a good place
to put shared information.
In this case,
all of the daily hits are just put
into a row set there and they just
are shared by all the applications.
And so every being then has
a quick access or to get
to the application being.
So that you can write code
very simply like this.
Also, over here on the left where we saw
we had the application outline,
you can see all the
beans in the application.
And there again is the application
being which we were just seeing the
reference to is available by accessing
through the application outline there.
You can just open it up and take a
look at the code for that guy there.
The same goes for the session being.
So for every time a user logs in,
the user gets a unique session being.
And that being can be
used to track information.
So in our case,
we'll use that to keep track of
whether the user's logged in,
what's their person ID in effect,
and all the information about them,
maybe their purchases and
things will be stored in that.
So that session will live across
multiple page requests and be available
for the UI to display things and to
do the transactions that we want to do.
Okay, I think that's pretty good now.
So once we logged in and we went over
to the browse page in the application,
we were then doing some more things
where we could browse through the
content and look at some of that.
So I'm going to switch over
to that page in the designer.
So I default,
we just pop over to the visual view here.
We can again see we have the fragment
up on top for the login navigation.
But the main component here
this time is a big data table.
So it turns out the data
table is one column.
But it's bound to a row set and the
row set contains a particular set of
products that match a certain media
type that you've selected on the right.
So you can see how the data
table is organized here.
It contains
Sort of a layout of images
and text information there.
And we can actually go in here and...
take a look at the data table layout.
So this is one of the nice customizers
for some of the more complex components,
is you can actually control data
binding and property binding of
the components to the backend data.
In this case,
we're binding to a database, a row set,
so it knows all about the columns
and all the information available
from the row set that we bound it to.
So in this case,
all these columns are available,
product names and components
and dates and all the sorts
of serial numbers and things,
And we chose to just grab basic
product column and have that available.
And then kind of a neat trick is done
inside of there is all the components
that are embedded into the particular row
of the table are nested into panels sort
of laid out in different orders there.
And each of those is individually
bound to different parts of the
information from the row set.
So we can show the title and we
can show the author and we can show
the thumbnail and lay that out how
we want it and bind each one to
a different thing individually.
So let me see one here
that's interesting.
It's like the artist's name.
Property Bindings.
It's actually able to show the,
so you can either bind to a kind of
an object property or you can bind
to a database and that's more of a
tailored type of binding dialogue.
So here we can see that.
We're bound to the product's row
set and this particular control
is bound to the artist's name.
So that ends up just creating an
expression in the JSF/JSP code
that binds it directly to that data
and that's evaluated at runtime.
So you really don't have to
write any code to populate these
controls in this kind of fashion.
You're just pointing and clicking
and selecting things to bind to.
Now all of those on this page
are bound to a single row
set that we've set up here.
And this was dropped from the
server navigator so we actually
have a set of data sources
running on a local database here.
And in the data sources there's a number
of tables for the media data source.
And these are all the tables that are
used by the application list of artists,
the list of hits and items and
medias and persons that can log in,
purchases, things like that.
And we've actually created
a product row set here.
So this was dropped on there.
And we can edit the query and take a
look at how that was actually gathered.
So we took basically the product row set
itself and then also joined it with the
artist row set so that we can come up
and instead of showing the artist ID,
we can show the name of the artist and a
little more information about the artist.
So we'll have the combination of
these two tables available to bind to.
See there.
Okay, so we can go back to that page.
Now there's a few more components
on here that are interesting.
There's a little
navigation guide up here.
So these are just buttons that have
images as part of their display.
One of these is for going
forward in the list,
one of them is for going back.
Double click on those will take
you back to the Java code to
basically an event handler method.
In this case,
buttons produce an action event,
and the action event can be used
to navigate between pages or just
perform some operation on the
page and stay on the same page.
And in our case,
we're using the navigation buttons,
previous action, next action,
to just adjust the row set
position within the table and
then just repaint the table.
So in this case,
we're just calculating how far to go
backwards and then resetting the position
of the row set of the data table.
And for going forward for next,
we do the same thing going
forward and just set the first
index position of the data table.
In this case, for navigating,
we want to stay on the same page,
so we're returning null.
Otherwise,
we could return an outcome name,
which will tell us what
next page to go to,
which we can take a look
at in a little while.
Any other comments, Bob?
No, you're doing fine.
Okay.
So I'm presuming that,
so he's showing you a number
of the features behind a
pre-generated application.
Obviously we're looking at
those artifacts which have been
generated by the application,
the tool itself.
What we'll,
I'm guessing we're doing next is we're
going to show you some of the visual
drag and drop and how you actually design
things in a visual manner to show you
how the actual experience can be easy,
not just looking at something
that's already been done.
So when we were looking at the app,
we realized there was a number
of features that obviously
were missing in the app.
So one of those might be nice to see,
a list of all the purchases.
So when you've logged into the app
and you're looking at what you bought,
what you're going to buy,
you might want to say, "Oh,
how much have I already spent?
Should I, let's take a look at what
I've already bought." So we
need to add a page to do that.
So this is our navigation editor which
gives us an overview of all the pages in
the application and all of the resources.
And it routes the links
between the pages.
So JSF uses kind of a layer of
indirection for managing navigation.
It creates an XML file that has
a list of outcomes and navigation
cases so that if you do decide
later on to change your page names,
there's only one file
that has to be updated.
And Creator will take care
of that automatically.
So when you rename things and move
things around and move links around,
the XML file is managed for you.
You're on the source file now.
Yeah.
In this case, there's the source file.
It's really just a snippet
of the Faces config file with
the navigation rules in it.
And so this is all we're looking at here.
So this particular visualizer is showing
that XML configuration file and also
looking at all of the pages themselves,
the model for those,
to know what's inside of them.
So within each page,
you can see all of the components
that create command action events
that could cause navigation.
And all of these in this
case are handled by code.
So this little code icon.
I think in all of this application,
they're all handled by code.
In this case, this one is directly
linked to another case.
I think it's just back
to the browser page.
So it's a very simple kind of navigation.
So you can either navigate with
kind of a hardwired link or you
can navigate with code that you
write in your event handler.
So we'll go ahead and add a new page.
And it's as simple as just saying--
New page.
What we want to do is add
it to the browse page.
We'll put a button on this page.
that we're going to use to navigate
us over to the purchases page and
so I'll just do basically let's
just add that guy simple navigation
So we give a name to the link so that
we have a name that we can understand.
If we decide later on to change the
purchases page to some other kind
of web or combination of pages,
we can easily do that later.
So now we want to actually go do
something nice with the button
because it's up here in the
corner and has the wrong name.
So we'll make sure we
have it where we want it.
I double clicked.
Let's go back.
I think I need a little more room
to get down to the bottom corner.
I'm going to put them down over here.
There's some space there for them.
So it handles the z-axis and
layering and everything too.
So in this case the background
was in front of the button
which wasn't very good.
So I'm going to change a
few things about the button.
Let's give it a better name.
Let's give it a better title.
At that point, it should be functional.
So now the action for this
particular button is just a
hardwired string which takes us to...
the purchases page.
So now we go to that
page and take a look.
So this is the page we created when
we were in the navigation editor.
It just created an empty page for us.
In this case the project template
populates it with a default style sheet.
So we've created a style sheet for
the whole app and all the pages
we want them to look the same.
So it's inheriting the
background and some of the
layout and coloring information.
There's a bunch of styles too
so the controls will have the
right colors and look and feel.
And we can go ahead and play around.
There's a few custom components that
were written for this application that
we can just drag and drop and they
will give us some nice look and feel.
So this particular one is kind of
a background grid thing with images
and it's just configured by how
many rows and columns you want.
It automatically attaches to some of the
background images in the style sheet.
So there we go.
There's our look and feel
in a couple of clicks.
Few other things.
Maybe we want to have some
text output for the page.
Let's say, let's
My purchases.
I hate my.
Let's call it something else.
Let's call it product purchases.
And that's pretty small,
so we'll use one of the standard classes,
style sheet classes called prompt.
I have to learn how to spell.
There we go.
A nicer size.
And now for the actual purchases,
what we're going to do is drop
in a data table and this will
then customize to show us the
purchases for this particular user,
this particular person that's logged in.
So I'll grab the data table,
drop it here.
So it starts out with
some empty dummy data.
So the primarily thing that we're
going to put in there is purchases.
So there's a big table that's
available for all the purchases
from all of the people.
So we'll go ahead and drop that guy.
I keep double-clicking.
Robert Brewin: Nice preview.
Yeah.
So this was actually a
preview of the table contents.
Where was I?
People, people.
So there's a number of different
ways to get back to where you were.
So the table picks up the schema
information for all the columns in the
row set table and actually gathers the
column headers and all the data types
for the columns and just basically
sets up a default layout for it.
We can go ahead and customize
it a little bit more,
but actually want to do something a
little nicer than showing the person ID,
the product ID.
We want to show a little bit more
information to the user about what
the product is that they purchased.
So I'm going to actually adjust
the row set by going back to the
query editor that we saw before.
In addition to looking
at the purchases table,
we'll add in the products table so
we can give them a better description
of the products that they purchased.
So we see it's automatically joined
because the keys match there.
And we can go and look at all of the
various columns that are available from
the query and turn off ones that we
definitely know we're not going to need.
You'll notice that the SQL in
the bottom is changing every
single time you check the box.
Again,
this is one of the other areas where
we're tracking all the changes you're
making in the system and making sure
that everything remains in sync.
So at this point,
we're actually controlling what columns
are returned in the query itself.
And so turning off stuff we don't
need just makes the transaction with
the database a little bit smaller.
Now, when we look at the particular
purchases for this user,
we don't want to see
them for all the users.
So we're going to change the person ID in
this and make it a criteria for the query
so we can provide it as a parameter.
And then we will only get
back the purchases that
match the particular person.
So we've parameterized it by doing that.
So now we need to add
a little bit of code.
So we'll go back to the purchases JSP.
Actually let's customize the
look and feel a little bit now.
So the layout of the table is
still sort of based on when we
first dropped the Roset onto it.
So let's go back to the layout
dialog and clean it up a little bit.
So we just have the original
Roset columns in there.
So we'll go back through and
change and put in some things
that might look a little better.
So what is the user going to want to see?
Probably the purchase date and the name
of the product and maybe a description
in case they forget what it's called.
And we can also shorten up what we're
putting in the actual column display.
Now depending on what you're doing,
if you're doing something more complex,
you can actually change the component
type that's used in each column.
So you can have drop-downs in the
column to get information back.
You can have buttons to perform actions.
You can use input text
fields within the column.
So you can mix and match
depending on what you're doing.
In this case,
we're just going to be doing all output.
And we can also set up some paging.
So we want to say, well,
our screen's kind of small,
and maybe these descriptions
are going to be big.
So let's limit the number of purchases
shown to three per page and go
ahead and turn on some navigation
controls so the user can step through.
And we'll just put those on the bottom.
So Creator then inserts the code
automatically and sets up the
components for this particular
process the way we want.
So we're going to see date, name,
description of the products.
So there's a little bit of code
we're going to have to write,
so we'll go back to the Java file.
So the Java Bean that's behind this page
This is all the code that's
handling the navigation for the
buttons that I just inserted.
There's one little bit of code that
we're going to need to initialize
the ROSEC query for the criteria.
We want to tell it what person
ID that we're going to put in there.
We have this capability of code clips,
so you can actually take code
that you use commonly and just
save it up on the pallet there.
It's just a drag and drop clipboard.
In this case,
it's really good for demos because you
don't have to sit and type and make
typos while everybody's watching you.
One thing I found that I had trouble
with with DP3 in this app is sometimes
drag and drop was causing me trouble.
I'm going to actually not try
to do drag and drop today.
I'm going to do it the hard way.
Let me go back.
I'm just going
So it's a couple lines of really
one actual functioning line of
code here is grab the data table
model which is sort of the model
side adapter for the table itself.
Set object one to be the session being
so the person ID from the session being.
So again remember the session is
tracking the user and we have a
property on the session which is the
person's ID when they're logged in.
And so we're just grabbing
that integer property,
popping it into the model so that it can
be used as part of the query to the ROSA.
And at that point we should have
an application that's ready to go.
So why don't we go ahead and
run it and see how it looks.
So we're building it.
At this point it's compiling
all the Java files using Ant as
a built-in compile engine.
It's going to deploy the whole WAR file
to the built-in application server.
So Java's
So there we go.
So we head on the browse page.
That's where we put it,
so let's go over to there.
So there's our view purchases.
Although in order for us
to look at our purchases,
we have to log in.
We'll go ahead and log in first.
Um, probably would have, yeah.
And what we can do is actually,
when we show that this works,
we'll go back in and we'll add some
functionality so that we can hide the
button when the user's not logged in.
So I just popped it on there without
doing any kind of checking so we can do
something a little smarter with that.
So now that we're logged in,
it knows that we're Mr.
Fubar.
We can go to view purchases.
And there we go.
We see we have three
purchases or three or more.
Some CDs we bought, various things there.
This one I didn't set up the size of the
table very well so we didn't fit into
our box but there's the four so we're
scrolling around through our purchase,
take a look at that.
So as this gentleman pointed out there,
why don't we fix that functionality a
little bit so instead of... ...losing
track of where I am... ...instead of
just always showing... ...I clicked
on something I shouldn't have.
Okay, so we're back.
You got rid of the leading comment,
the opening comment.
It's gone.
Yeah.
Don't know how you did that.
I think I dragged and dropped
a bunch of code up to the top.
So let's see.
Let's go to the browse page.
That's where our button was.
Get rid of this guy, get some more room.
We can take a look at almost all of
the Java Server Faces components.
There's an advanced property called
rendered and this determines whether
that the particular component is going
to be rendered for that page rendering.
So what you can actually do is
have some logic in your back
end beam that turns off certain
components depending on things,
depending on conditions or states,
so you can actually have a page,
a single page that's defined with
different personalities depending on
various settings and flags and things.
So we'll go ahead and turn that
off and we'll do some behind the
scenes work in this particular case.
Let's see if I can find that guy.
This is the top.
So there's the button
that we had just added.
And one of the properties on the
button that's actually managed normally
by the UI is the rendered flag.
I'm sorry, actually I'm looking at
the wrong button there.
I'm trying to find the purchases.
I should probably use the search feature.
I'm going to go ahead and do that.
I'm going
While he's doing that.
- He did.
- So one of the things that we're
looking at is it is a highly visual
environment and as you can see,
you also have code if you really
are comfortable working there,
which Carl is not right now.
And again,
a lot of the things that we're trying
to do is we're trying to make things
as easy as possible for developers,
so a lot of the things you'll see
when you use the environment is,
there's a lot of consistent
gestures you do in the UI,
which regardless of the type of action
you're trying to perform are consistent.
So you notice that while this
may be a very western thing,
everything you're trying to
do in terms of drag and drop
is from the left to the right.
So you drag components on
from the left to the right,
you drag services, you drag data,
you drag,
do everything from left to the right.
Code clips, which you didn't show,
and maybe we'll do it at
the end to see if it works.
Again, you drag and drop those.
Those are parameterized, so for instance,
you can in fact create reusable
code clips and code snippets that
you can use or you can provide
other developers so they can
create applications of this type.
And then everything on
the right are things,
are properties and attributes you
control in terms of application,
component properties, display properties,
and so on.
The other thing that
the environment has is,
we know that screen real
estate can be quite limiting,
so there's a number of capabilities
in terms of auto hiding,
and you can dock windows and
different kinds of things like that.
Did you find it?
- What I'm gonna do is type this in now.
Now somehow I ended up bound to
something else which was surprising me,
but I think this is the right place.
So what we really wanna do is
control this particular button's
rendered property based on
whether the user is logged on,
logged in, logged on.
So on the session being itself,
There is a property called logged on.
So what we're doing here is
using a feature of JSF which
is called expression language
EL and we're doing value binding.
So we can just reference beans
in our application by name and
reference their properties.
So basically binding some particular
behavior or look of the component to some
data that's in the beans in the back end.
So just by binding that.
A lot of the properties
in the tool have the UI
[Transcript missing]
So now we see that the button's
not displayed here and we can go
ahead and try to run that again.
So one of the things that
we was talking about,
you can create custom
components for this.
Everything that runs in the system
are standard JSF components,
so if you know how to
write a JSF component,
all of those you can easily
drag and drop and put into
applications that people can use.
There are a number of third
parties which are creating
components that work with Creator.
I'd rather not mention them just
because I'll probably miss one
and they'll get upset at me,
but companies like iLog and
ChartFX and so on will do this.
And they've created a number of
components which work in Creator,
And you can use them and design them
and use them in applications every day.
So now we see we're back to the
browse page and the button is hidden.
So hopefully when I log in,
The button will be
enabled and there we go.
So now it won't let us even navigate
to the purchases page until we've
got the logged in status true.
So that didn't really require any code,
just going in and typing
a little expression.
So go in under the covers if you need to
and that's perfectly fine with Creator.
It won't mess with your changes and it
will respect everything you've done.
That's about all I had.
Okay,
so let's just try the drag and drop clip.
Okay.
We're at the end.
It was just scaring me last night
because it did really bad things.
Then worked perfectly fine this morning.
It was, you know how it goes.
Pick a clip, any clip.
"It's not locked up.
Oh yes it is.
Okay.
Anyway, it is amazing actually
if you think about it.
So the Apple engineers have actually
built a new release of the JDK.
He downloaded it last night and the
whole thing is running on that JDK.
So just that one little oopsie
could be caused by us too.
So the fact that, I mean,
this is really cool stuff." "We're
running the app server and the database
and the IDE all on…" "Java database,
Java application server and
the tool all running on DP3."
"Yeah." "Downloaded last night.
Yeah, brave guy.
Okay." "Yeah."
So let's talk a little bit about roadmap.
The first thing that's interesting is
that the early access available now
and I know that various Mac people have
found it because I'm seeing downloads.
So what we're doing today is the
hammerhead release is what we
announced yesterday at Java 1,
primarily for a number of platforms,
not all of them, including a Mac,
unfortunately,
but it is designed to create dynamic
web applications based on JSF.
The Mac OS X, did it?
Throw something at me.
Steve isn't in the room, is he?
Mac OS X release will be available
within 90 days of our initial release.
Right now,
you can get the initial release.
If you go to a site you'll see
on the slide here in a moment,
you can download the EA,
you can try it out,
you can provide feedback.
Part of that is you get into the forums,
and if there's things that
you believe need to be added,
you can tell us now,
and hopefully we can address
them by the time we actually
release the Mac OS X release.
Again, also, think about the book,
and no, I didn't write it,
so I'm not getting royalties,
but you can get the book,
and that will give you some discount
when the final release comes out.
You're going to save yourself.
about 50 bucks and get the year
subscription which gives you all
the content that goes with this.
Thresher is an update that's primarily
going to be based on customer feedback.
So this is a release we're looking
at roughly the end of the year.
The main goal there is to take customer
input and apply it to the product,
fix some quality issues,
improve the ease of use,
and essentially increase the
breadth of whatever coverage.
So the number of app servers,
number of databases,
talking more to J2AE artifacts
like EJBs and so on,
easier for our customers.
When we get to the MAKO,
which is a release we're
targeting for next year,
we're talking about broadening
the client coverage.
So richer clients,
whether they're web or non-web,
mobile devices, and again,
simplified modeling.
So one of the things that we really
didn't show is we showed page navigation.
We really didn't show
application modeling.
So how is this piece of logic talking,
for instance,
to a piece of logic on my app server?
So for more information,
obviously you can contact us.
So I'm Robert Brewin.
Dan Roberts is in the Hawaiian shirt
over there because I think
he's going on vacation soon.
And Jim Inscore who
I don't think is here.
Go to www.sun.com/jscreator.
Follow the links, download the EA.
You can take a look at some of the form
samples and examples that are out there.
Obviously,
the Apple reference library will
give you access to that stuff.